+ Most of what will be, said on these questions will not be new; it has probably occurred to most
“scientists in one form or another. My principal aim is to illuminate it from several sides. The first
point is that the enormous usefulness of matheniatics in the natural sciences is samething bordering
{on the mysterious and that there is no rational explanation for it. Second, it is just this uncanny
“usefulness ‘of mathematical concepts that raises the question of the uniqueness of aur physical
: theories, In order to establish the first point, that mathematics plays an unreasonably important role
in physics; it will be useful to say. 2 few.words’on the question, "What is mathematics?", then,
What is physics", then, haw mathematics enters physical theories, and last, why the success of
-nathemiatics in its rote in physics appears so baffling, Much less will be said an the second point:
{the uniqueness of the theories of physics. A proper answer to this question wauld require elaborate
experimental and theoretical work which has not been undertaken to date. “* Sw esse
WHAT IS MATHEMATICS?
‘'Samebody once said that philosophy is the misuse of a terminolagy which was invented just for this
*'purpose.[ This statement is quoted here from W. Dubistav's Die Philosophie der Mathematik in der
“Gegenwart (Bertin: Junker and Durinhaupt Verlag, 1932), p. t.] In the same vein, 1 would say that
‘mathematics. is the science’ of skillful operations with concepts’ and rules invented ‘just’ for this
“purpose. The principal emphasis is on the invention of concepts. Mathematics would soon run out
of interesting theorems if these had to be formulated in terms of the concepts which already appear
“in the axioms, Furthermore, whereas it is unquestionably’ true that the concepts of elementary
mathematics and particularly elementary geometry were formulated to describe entities which are
directly suggested by the actual world, the same daes not seem to be true of the more advanced
“concepts, in particular the concepts which play such an important role in physics. Thus, the rules for
{Operations with pairs of numbers are obviously designed to give the'same results as the operations
«with fractions which we first leamed without reference to."pairs of numbers.":The rules for the
* operations with sequences, that is; with irrational numbers, still belong to the category of rules
which were determined so‘as to reproduce mules for the operations with quantities which were
already. known’ to us,-Most more advanced mathematical’ concepts, such as complex numbers,
j algebras, linear operators, Borel sets + ‘and this list could be continued almost indefinitely = were so
devised that they are apt subjects on which the mathematician can demonstrate his ingenuity and
“sense of formal beauty. In fact, the definition of these concepts, with a realization that interesting
and ingenious ‘considerations : could: be. applied :to them,"is the: first demonstration ‘of ‘the
ingeniousness of the mathematician who defines them. The depth of thought which goes into the
formulation of the mathematical concepts is later justified by the skill with which these concepts are
‘used.” The great mathematician ‘fully,’ almost ruthlessly, ‘exploits ‘the? domain ‘of permissible
“reasoning and skirts the impermissible. That his recklessness does not lead him into a morass of
contradictions is a miracte in itself; certainly it is hard to believe that our reasoning power was
. brought, by Darwin’s process of. natural selection, to the perfection‘which it seems to possess.
“However, this is not our present subject. The principal point which will have to be recalled later is
that the mathematician could formulate only a handful of interesting theorems without defining
“concepts beyond those contained in the axioms and that the concepts outside those contained in the
axioms are defined with a view of permitting ingenious logical operations which appeal to our
aesthetic sense both as operations and also in their results of great generality and simplicity. [Af
Potanyi, in his Personal Knowledge (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958), says: "All these
difficulties are but consequences of our refitsal to see that mathematics cannot be defined without
acknowledging its most obvious feature: namely, that it is interesting" (p. 188)).
<The complex numbers provide a particularly striking example for the foregoing. Certainly, nothing
in our experience suggests the intraduction of these quantities. Indeed, if a mathematician is asked
‘to: justify his interest in‘complex numbers, he will paint, with some indignation, to, the many

