* Reprinted from Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 13, No.1 (February 1960). New York:
+ John Witey & Sons, Inc, Copyright © 1960 by John Wiley & Sous, Inc. —— .
THE UNREASONABLE EFFECTIVENSS
OF MATHEMATICS IN.THE NATURAL.
Eugene Wigner.
Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty cold and.
‘austere, like that of sculpuire, without appeal fo any part of our Weaker nature, without
the gorgeous trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a stern:
perfection’ such as only the greatest art can show. The irie spirit of delight, the
exaltation, the sense of being more than Man, which is the touchstone of the highest:
excellence, is to be found in mathematics as surely as in poetry.
*$ BERTRAND RUSSELL, Study of Mathematics
“There is a story about two friends, who were classmates in bigh school, talking about their jobs.
;,One of them became a statistician and was working on population trends. He showed a reprint to his
former classtnate. The reprint started, as usual, with the Gaussian distribution and the statistician
explained to his former classmate the meaning of the ‘symbols for the’ actual population, far the
j average population, and so on. His classmate’ was a bit incredulous and was not quite sure whether
“the statistician was pulling his leg.."How can you know thst?” was his query: "And what is this
: symbol here?" "Oh,".. said: the: statistician, ."this:is pi." "What ‘is: that?":"The ratio of ‘the
“circumference of the circle to its didmeter." “Well, now you are pushing your joke too far,” said the
classmate, "surely the population has nothing to do with the circumference of the circle.” :
[ Naturally, we ate inclined to smile about the simplicity of the classmates approach. Nevertheless,
éwhen I heard this story, I had to admit to’ an eerie feeling because, surely, the reaction of the
classmate betrayed only plain common sense. I was even more confused when, not many days later,
jsomeone came to me and expressed his bewilderment [The remark to be quoted was made by F.
Werner when he was a student in Princeton.) with the fact that we make a rather narrow selection
when choosing the data on which we test our theories: "How do we know that, if we made a theory
“which focuses its ‘attention an phenomena we disregard and disregards some of the phenomena now
commanding our attention, that we could not build another theory which has little in common with
“the present one but which, nevertheless, explains just as many phenomena as the present theory?" It
: has to be admitted that we have no definite evidence that there is no such theory.
‘The preceding two stories illustiate’the two main points which are‘the subjects of. thé present
“discourse: The first point is that mathematical concepts tim up in entirely unexpected connections.
Moreover, they often permit an unexpectedly close and accurate description of the phenomena in
“these connections. Secondly, just because of this circumstance, and because we do not understand
ythe reasons‘ of their usefulness, .we! cannot: know’ whether. a: theory: formulated: in ‘terms of
Zmathematical concepts is uniquely appropriate. We are in a position similar to that of a man who
was provided with a bunch of keys and who, having to open several doors in succession, always hit
‘on the right key on the first or second trial. He became skeptical conceming the uniqueness of the
coordination between keys and doors.” aan a we es

