The physicist is interested in discovering the laws of inanimate nature. In order to understand this
statement, it is necessary to analyze the concept,."law of nature."

The world around us is of baffling complexity and the most obvious fact about it is that we cannot
predict the future. Although the joke attributes only to the optimist the view that the future is
uncertain, the optimist is tight in this case: the future is unpredictable. It is, as Schrodinger has
remarked, a miracle that in spite of the baffling complexity of the world, certain regularities in the
events could be discovered: One such regularity, discovered by Galileo, is that two:rocks, dropped
at the same time from the same height, reach the ground atthe same time. The-laws of nature are
concermed with such regularities. Galileo’s regularity is a prototype of a large class of regularities.
It is a surprising regularity for three reasons.

The first reason that it is surprising is that it is true:not only in Pisa, and in Galileo’s time, it is true
everywhere on the Earth, was always true, and will always be true. This property of the regularity is
a recognized invariance property and, as I had occasion to point out some time ago, without.
invariance principles similar to those implied in the preceding generalization of Galileo’s
observation, physics would not be possible. The second surprising feature is that the regularity
which we are discussing is independent of so many conditions which could have an effect on it. It is
valid no matter whether it rains or. not, whether the experiment is carried out in.a room or from.the
Leaning Tower, no matter whether the person who drops the rocks is aman or a woman. It is valid
even if the two rocks are dropped, simultaneously and from the same height, by two different
people. There are, obviously, innumerable other conditions which are all immaterial from the point
of view of the validity of Galileo’s regularity. The irrelevancy of so many circumstances which
could play a role in the phenomenon observed has: also been called an invariance. However, this
invariance is of a different character from the preceding one since it cannot be formulated as a
general principle. The exploration of the conditions which do, and which do not, influence a
phenomenon is’ part of the early experimental exploration of a field. It. is the skill and ingenuity of
the experimenter which show him phenomena which depend on a‘relatively narrow set.of relatively
easily realizable and reproducible conditions. ['see,.in this connection, the graphic essay of M.
Deutsch, Daedalus 87, 86 (1958). A. Shimony has called my attention to.a similar passage in C. S.
Peirce’s Essays in the.Philosophy of Science (New York: The Liberal Arts Press, 1957), p. 237.] In
the present case, Galileo’s restriction of his observations to relatively heavy bodies was the most
important step in this regard. Again, it is true that if there were no phenomena which are
independent of all but a manageably small set of conditions, physics would be impossible.

